---
title: "Breaking down walls"
created: 2023-06-08
---

Understanding the interconnections between various aspects of our personal lives can profoundly impact our ability to learn, perform, and achieve success. As such, our overall mental state greatly influences our effectiveness across different areas. Recognizing recurring psychological patterns and emotional responses, particularly those that hinder our progress, is essential. Awareness of these interconnections can allow us to break free from self-imposed mental barriers and transform our weaknesses into strengths.

For instance, life's pressures can cause us to mirror our real-life struggles within our work or passions. An adventurous lifestyle filled with constant travel and adaptation may reflect in one's work as difficulty in handling transitions. In such cases, the person might struggle to adapt to changes in their field of expertise, mimicking their struggle to adapt to new environments in real life. Therefore, recognizing these mirrored struggles could lead to transformative self-improvement, both in personal life and professional performance.

Moreover, the way we approach our work and handle pressure can also offer valuable insights into our psychological state. Recognizing this link can turn our areas of expertise into platforms for self-improvement. We can then tackle these recurring issues head-on, both in life and in our area of expertise, transforming weaknesses into strengths.

Lastly, an open-minded approach to learning and improvement is vital. Many individuals may find themselves stagnant in their development, repeating the same mistakes due to a fear of leaving their comfort zone. This resistance to change often stems from the need to be correct, which can prevent us from embracing the potential growth that comes from acknowledging and addressing our errors. Embracing feedback and maintaining a willingness to adapt and change can lead to significant personal and professional growth.

---
### References

*Waitzkin, J. (2007). The Art of Learning: An Inner Journey to Optimal Performance. Free Press.*

> During my study of the critical positions, I noted the feeling I had during the actual chess game. I explained above how in the pressure of tournaments, the tension in the mind mounts with the tension in the position, and an error on the board usually parallels a psychological collapse of sorts. Almost invariably, there was a consistent psychological strain to my errors in a given tournament, and what I began to notice is that my problems on the chessboard usually were manifesting themselves in my life outside of chess. 

> For example, while living in Slovenia it appealed to my sense of adventure to be on the road, traveling, writing, exploring new places, but I also missed my family. I hardly ever spoke English, communicating with everyone but my girlfriend (who did speak English) in broken Spanish, bad Italian, and even worse Serbo-Croatian. I was a stranger in a strange land. On the other hand, I felt quite at home in Vrholvje. I loved the charming village life, and enjoyed my periods of introspection. But then every month or so I would leave Slovenia and take off, alone, for Hungary, Germany, or Holland to compete in a grueling two-week tournament. Each trip was an adventure, but in the beginning I was invariably homesick. I missed my girlfriend. I missed my family, I missed my friends, I missed everything. I felt like a leaf in the wind, adrift, all alone. The first few days were always rough but then I’d get my bearings in the new city and have a wonderful time. I was just having trouble with transitions. It was amazing how clearly this manifested on the chessboard. For a period of time, almost all my chess errors came in a moment immediately following or preceding a big change. For example, if I was playing a positional chess game, with complex maneuvering, long-term strategical planning, and building tension, and suddenly the struggle exploded into concrete tactics, I would sometimes be slow to accommodate the new scenario. Or, if I was playing a very tactical position that suddenly transformed into an abstract endgame, I would keep on calculating instead of taking a deep breath and making long-term plans. I was having trouble with the first major decision following the departure from prepared opening analysis and I was not keeping pace with sudden shifts in momentum. My whole chess psychology was about holding on to what was, because I was fundamentally homesick. When I finally noticed this connection, I tackled transitions in both chess and life. In chess games, I would take some deep breaths and clear my mind when the character of the struggle shifted. In life, I worked on embracing change instead of fighting it. With awareness and action, in both life and chess my weakness was transformed into a strength. Once I recognized that deeply buried secrets in a competitor tend to surface under intense pressure, my study of chess became a form of psychoanalysis. I unearthed my subtlest foibles through chess, and the link between my personal and artistic sides was undeniable. The psychological theme could range from transitions to resilient concentration, fluidity of mind, control, leaps into the unknown, sitting with tension, the downward spiral, being at peace with discomfort, giving into fatigue, emotional turbulence, and invariably the chess moves paralleled the life moment. Whenever I noticed a weakness, I took it on. I also studied my opponents closely. Like myself, their psychological nuances in life manifested over the board. I would watch a rival tapping his feet impatiently while waiting for an elevator or carefully maneuvering around his peas on a dinner plate. If someone was a controlling person who liked to calculate everything out before acting, I would make the chess position chaotic, beyond calculation, so he would have to make that uncomfortable leap into the unknown. If an opponent was intuitive, fast, and hungering for abstract creations, I would make the position precise, so the only solution lay in patient, mind-numbing math.

> While I learned with open pores- no ego in the way- it seemed that many other students were frozen in place, repeating the errors over and over, unable to improve because of a fear of releasing old habits. When Chen made suggestions, they would explain their thinking in an attempt to justify themselves. They were locked up by the need to be correct.

> Themes that arise in one area of our personal lives will also surface in other areas—all aspects of life are interconnected. The ability to learn and perform in consistently effectual ways is therefore impacted by our general state of mind. It is vital that we unearth the psychological patterns and emotional responses that get in the way of our successes and take our weaknesses on. By bringing awareness to the threads connecting mind and action, we can break down the walls between the disparate parts of our lives that we have mentally built up and take corrective steps to transform all our weaknesses into strengths. – https://theartoflearningproject.org/resources/art-of-introspection/breaking-down-walls/

### Related Notes
**Source**: [[The Art of Learning]]
**Tags**: #EvergreenNote
