---
title: "Developing the internal compass"
created: 2023-06-08
---

In our quest to master a discipline, we begin with the fundamentals, establishing a solid foundation rooted in core principles. As we progress, we absorb large amounts of data, and our mind begins to 'chunk' this information, identifying patterns and relationships. It's like creating a path through a dense jungle of information; the more we tread the path, the clearer and quicker it becomes. However, to reach the zenith of mastery, we need to cultivate intuition, a bridge between our conscious and unconscious mind. This process entails achieving a nuanced state of mind, where the unconscious, flowing freely, takes precedence over the conscious, albeit with the precision the conscious provides. When we connect with our intuition, we unlock our potential to synthesize vast realms of knowledge into creative insights almost instantaneously.

## Concept Breakdown:

### Journey to mastery 
Mastery in any discipline is a journey that begins with understanding the fundamentals. We must establish a robust foundation rooted in the principles of the discipline in question. As we progress, we expand and refine our knowledge, guided by our individual predispositions. The result is a network of deeply internalized and interconnected knowledge that stems from a personal locus point.

### The Chunking Theory
Our minds have a remarkable ability to handle massive amounts of information by 'chunking.' Chunking is the cognitive process by which our mind groups related pieces of information together. These information clusters are bound together by patterns or principles unique to a discipline. Through repeated exposure and practice, we increase our ability to recognize these patterns quickly, enabling us to process information more efficiently.

### Carved Neural Pathways 
The process of creating chunks and navigating between them can be likened to carving paths through a jungle of information. As we repeatedly engage with a discipline, our mind effectively creates these paths, simplifying future navigation through the subject matter. The more we use these paths, the clearer and faster they become, allowing us to access and recall information more swiftly.

### The Role of Intuition 
Intuition serves as the bridge between our conscious and unconscious mind. To reach the pinnacle of mastery, we must cultivate our intuitive abilities. This involves shifting the primary role from the conscious mind, often bogged down in the details, to the unconscious mind, which is more adept at synthesizing vast quantities of information and drawing from the deeply interconnected knowledge we've acquired over time.

### The State of Flow
Achieving mastery requires more than just technical understanding; it demands a nuanced state of mind where the conscious mind relaxes, allowing the unconscious to flow freely. This state of 'flow' isn't a disconnection from the conscious mind but a subtle reintegration of the conscious into an unconscious process. When this balance is achieved, we are more capable of generating creative insights, harmonizing vast realms of technical knowledge into a single solution instantaneously.

Related:
- [[First principles thinking and its evolving nature]]
- [[Circle of competence]]
- [[Strengthen your circle of competence with key practices]]

---
### References

*Waitzkin, J. (2007). The Art of Learning: An Inner Journey to Optimal Performance. Free Press.*

> When I started thinking about how I could consistently make my perception of time be different from my opponents’, I realized that I had to delve into the operating mechanism of intuition. I suspect we have all had the experience of being stumped by something, eventually moving on to something else, and then suddenly knowing the answer to the initial problem. Most of us have also had the experience of meeting someone and having a powerfully good or bad feeling about them, without knowing why. I have found that, even if a few times it has taken years to pan out, these guiding instincts have been on the money. Along the same lines, in my chess days, nearly all of my revelatory moments emerged from the unconscious. My numbers to leave numbers approach to chess study was my way of having a working relationship with the unconscious parts of my mind. I would take in vast amounts of technical information that my brain somehow put together into bursts of insight that felt more like music or wind than mathematical combinations. Increasingly, I had the sense that the key to these leaps was interconnectedness—some part of my being was harmonizing all my relevant knowledge, making it gel into one potent eruption, and suddenly the enigmatic was crystal-clear. But what was really happening? The question of intuition is hotly debated among psychologists, philosophers, and artists, and it has been a source of much research and thought in my life. My grandmother, Stella Waitzkin, a boldly creative Abstract Expressionist painter and sculptor, used to tell me that intuition was the hand of God. Artists often refer to intuition as a muse. In the introduction, I mentioned that one philosophy professor of mine at Columbia University told me, rather proudly, that the very notion of intuition is incoherent—it doesn’t exist. In my opinion, intuition is our most valuable compass in this world. It is the bridge between the unconscious and the conscious mind, and it is hugely important to keep in touch with what makes it tick. If we get so caught up in narcissistic academic literalism that we dismiss intuition as nonexistent because we don’t fully understand it, or if we blithely consider the unconscious to be a piece of machinery that operates mystically in a realm that we have no connection to, then we lose the rich opportunity to have open communication with the wellspring of our creativity.

> For much of this book I have described my vision of the road to mastery—you start with the fundamentals, get a solid foundation fueled by understanding the principles of your discipline, then you expand and refine your repertoire, guided by your individual predispositions, while keeping in touch, however abstractly, with what you feel to be the essential core of the art. What results is a network of deeply internalized, interconnected knowledge that expands from a central, personal locus point. The question of intuition relates to how that network is navigated and used as fuel for creative insight.

> The clearest way to approach this discussion is with the imagery of chunking and carved neural pathways. Chunking relates to the mind’s ability to assimilate large amounts of information into a cluster that is bound together by certain patterns or principles particular to a given discipline. The initial studies on this topic were, conveniently, performed on chess players who were considered to be the clearest example of sophisticated unconscious pattern integration. The Dutch psychologist Adriaan de Groot (1965) and years later the team of William Simon and Herbert Chase (1973) put chess players of varying skill levels in front of chess positions and then asked them to re-create those positions on an adjacent empty board. The psychologists taped and studied the eye patterns and timing of the players while they performed the tasks. The relevant conclusions were that stronger players had better memories when the positions were taken out of the games of other strong players, because they re-created the positions by taking parts of the board (say five or six pieces) and chunking (merging) them in the mind by their interrelationships. The stronger the player, the more sophisticated was his or her ability to quickly discover connecting logical patterns between the pieces (attack, defense, tension, pawn chains, etc.) and thus they had better chess memories. On the other hand, when presented with random chess positions, with no logical cohesiveness, the memories of the players seemed to level off. In some cases the weaker players performed more effectively, because they were accustomed to random situations while the stronger players were a bit lost without “logic to the position.” So, in a nutshell, chunking relates to the mind’s ability to take lots of information, find a harmonizing/logically consistent strain, and put it together into one mental file that can be accessed as if it were a single piece of information.

> By "carved neural pathways" I am referring to the process of creating chunks and the navigation system between chunks. I am not making a literal physical description, so much as illustrating the way the brain operates. Let’s say that I spend fifteen years studying chess. During these thousands of hours, my mind is effectively cutting paths through the dense jungle of chess. The jungle analogy is a good one. Imagine how time-consuming it would be to use a machete to cut your way through thick foliage. A few miles could take days. Once the path is cleared, however, you could move quickly through the clearing. If you were to make a road and ride a bike or other vehicle, the transportation would get faster still. When confronted by a new chess position, initially I have to plod through the variations. During this process, I discover organizing principles and new patterns of movement. This new information gets systematized into a network of chunks that I can access with increasing ease as my navigational function improves.

> This is where things get interesting. We are at the moment when psychology begins to transcend technique. Everyone at a high level has a huge amount of chess understanding, and much of what separates the great from the very good is deep presence, relaxation of the conscious mind, which allows the unconscious to flow unhindered. This is a nuanced and largely misunderstood state of mind that when refined involves a subtle reintegration of the conscious mind into a free-flowing unconscious process. The idea is to shift the primary role from the conscious to the unconscious without blissing out and losing the precision the conscious can provide.

> To truly excel, we must cultivate access to intuition—the bridge between the conscious and unconscious mind that is the well-spring of our creativity. We can achieve this access by alternating deep and repetitive study at the highest possible level with periods of rest and relaxation. When we connect with our intuition, we are calling into service a part of our brain that can perceive the interconnections between vast amounts of technical knowledge and instantaneously harmonize them into a single creative solution. – https://theartoflearningproject.org/resources/art-of-introspection/develop-the-internal-compass/

### Related Notes
**Source**: [[The Art of Learning]]
**Tags**: #EvergreenNote
