---
title: "Investment in loss"
created: 2023-06-05
---

In the pursuit of excellence, we should continuously seek challenges that push our abilities to the limit. Engaging in competition with those slightly superior in skill leads to growth and resilience, and instills a balanced perspective on success and failure. The path to mastery, such as in a complex game like chess, entails substantial mental, physical, and emotional commitment. Losses may be excruciating, but they are essential components of the journey. By [[Learning how to fail properly]], losses serve as powerful teachers that catalyze personal and professional growth.

The relationship between process and outcome is delicate. Emphasizing learning over results is healthy, but it should not be a cover for avoidance of failure or fear of judgment (see: [[Value process before results - Entity theorists vs Incremental theorists]]). Fixation on results is counterproductive, but short-term goals, embedded in a nurturing long-term philosophy, can foster development and motivation. Complete sheltering from failure can impede growth and reduce one's resilience in handling future challenges.

People should be encouraged, especially from an early age, to invest their whole selves in their endeavors and learn from every outcome, whether it's a success or a failure. This is crucial in the development of a healthy mindset and the ability to push one's boundaries. The pursuit of excellence requires consistent effort, willingness to resist complacency, and a readiness to confront the discomfort that comes with stretching one's abilities.

Various stages of learning require an understanding of one's vulnerability. There are times of strength and readiness, and there are periods of softness and growth. In these periods of learning and adaptation, one may not be at their peak performance, and that's acceptable. It's crucial to grant ourselves the time to cultivate new skills and internalize them without the pressure of immediate brilliant performance.

Furthermore, it's important to have a growth mindset that embraces failure as a stepping stone towards improvement. Even in high-stakes environments where performance is consistently scrutinized, this mindset is invaluable. It allows us to continue learning and adapting without getting entrapped in the fear of public failure.

Great achievers are distinguished not by their infallibility, but by their resilience and their willingness to continually put themselves on the line, regardless of outcome. For instance, the basketball legend Michael Jordan is renowned not only for his match-winning shots but also his numerous game-losing ones. His journey to greatness was marked by his courage to take risks and learn from the associated failures.

The pursuit of excellence is a long-term, organic learning process. It often requires stepping out of our comfort zones and facing the risk of failure. Like a hermit crab that abandons its shell in search of a larger one, we too must sometimes expose ourselves to vulnerabilities and uncertainties to facilitate our growth. Those who embrace this process are better equipped to navigate life's challenges and are more content on their journey. The ability to maintain this perspective amidst difficulties forms the heart of the art of learning.

---
### References

*Waitzkin, J. (2007). The Art of Learning: An Inner Journey to Optimal Performance. Free Press.*

> Chess was a constant challenge. My whole career, my father and I searched out opponents who were a little stronger than me, so even as I dominated the scholastic circuit, losing was part of my regular experience. I believe this was important for maintaining a healthy perspective on the game. While there was a lot of pressure on my shoulders, fear of failure didn’t move me so much as an intense passion for the game

> This is not to say that losing didn’t hurt. It did. There is something particularly painful about being beaten in a chess game. In the course of a battle, each player puts every ounce of his or her tactical, strategical, emotional, physical, and spiritual being into the struggle. The brain is pushed through terrible trials; we stretch every fiber of our mental capacity; the whole body aches from exhaustion after hours of rapt concentration. In the course of a dynamic chess fight, there will be shifts in momentum, near misses, narrow escapes, innovative creations, and precise refutations. When your position teeters on the brink of disaster, it feels like your life is on the line. When you win, you survive another day. When you lose, it is as if someone has torn out your heart and stepped on it. No exaggeration. Losing is brutal. 

> This brings up an incipient danger in what may appear to be an incremental approach. I have seen many people in diverse fields take some version of the process-first philosophy and transform it into an excuse for never putting themselves on the line or pretending not to care about results. They claim to be egoless, to care only about learning, but really this is an excuse to avoid confronting themselves. This issue of process vs. goal is very delicate, and I want to carefully define how I feel the question should be navigated. 

> It would be easy to read about the studies on entity vs. incremental theories of intelligence and come to the conclusion that a child should never win or lose. I don’t believe this is the case. If that child discovers any ambition to pursue excellence in a given field later in life, he or she may lack the toughness to handle inevitable obstacles. While a fixation on results is certainly unhealthy, short-term goals can be useful developmental tools if they are balanced within a nurturing long-term philosophy. Too much sheltering from results can be stunting. The road to success is not easy or else everyone would be the greatest at what they do—we need to be psychologically prepared to face the unavoidable challenges along our way, and when it comes down to it, the only way to learn how to swim is by getting in the water.

> A heartfelt, empathetically present, incrementally inspiring mom or dad or coach can liberate an ambitious child to take the world by the horns. As adults, we have to take responsibility for ourselves and nurture a healthy, liberated mind-set. We need to put ourselves out there, give it our all, and reap the lessons win or lose. The fact of the matter is that there will be nothing learned from any challenge in which we don’t try our hardest. Growth comes at the point of resistance. We learn by pushing ourselves and finding what really lies at the outer reaches of our abilities.

> When Chen made suggestions, they would explain their thinking in an attempt to justify themselves. They were locked up by the need to be correct.

> Thinking back on my competitive life, I realize how defining these themes of Beginner’s Mind and Investment in Loss have been. Periodically, I have had to take apart my game and go through a rough patch. In all disciplines, there are times when a performer is ready for action, and times when he or she is soft, in flux, broken-down or in a period of growth. Learners in this phase are inevitably vulnerable. It is important to have perspective on this and allow yourself protected periods for cultivation. A gifted boxer with a fabulous right and no left will get beat up while he tries to learn the jab. Or take the talented high school basketball player learning how to play point guard at the college level. He may have been able to dominate schoolyards in his past, but now he has to learn to see the whole court, share the ball, bring the best out of his teammates. If a young athlete is expected to perform brilliantly in his first games within this new system, he will surely disappoint. He needs time to internalize the new skills before he will improve. The same can be said about a chess player adjusting to a new opening repertoire, a martial artist learning a new technique, or a golfer, for example Tiger Woods, taking apart his swing in order to make a long-term improvement. 

> How can we incorporate these ideas into the real world? In certain competitive arenas—our working lives, for example—there are seldom weeks in which performance does not matter. Similarly, it is not so difficult to have a beginner’s mind and to be willing to invest in loss when you are truly a beginner, but it is much harder to maintain that humility and openness to learning when people are watching and expecting you to perform. True enough. This was a huge problem for me in my chess career after the movie came out. Psychologically, I didn’t give myself the room to invest in loss.

> My response is that it is essential to have a liberating incremental approach that allows for times when you are not in a peak performance state. We must take responsibility for ourselves, and not expect the rest of the world to understand what it takes to become the best that we can become. Great ones are willing to get burned time and again as they sharpen their swords in the fire. Consider Michael Jordan. It is common knowledge that Jordan made more last-minute shots to win the game for his team than any other player in the history of the NBA. What is not so well known, is that Jordan also missed more last-minute shots to lose the game for his team than any other player in the history of the game. What made him the greatest was not perfection, but a willingness to put himself on the line as a way of life. Did he suffer all those nights when he sent twenty thousand Bulls fans home heartbroken? Of course. But he was willing to look bad on the road to basketball immortality. 

> In my experience, successful people shoot for the stars, put their hearts on the line in every battle, and ultimately discover that the lessons learned from the pursuit of excellence mean much more than the immediate trophies and glory. In the long run, painful losses may prove much more valuable than wins—those who are armed with a healthy attitude and are able to draw wisdom from every experience, “good” or “bad,” are the ones who make it down the road. They are also the ones who are happier along the way. Of course the real challenge is to stay in range of this long-term perspective when you are under fire and hurting in the middle of the war. This, maybe our biggest hurdle, is the at the core of the art of learning. 

> So how does this affect us in our day-to-day lives? Fundamentally. The key to pursuing excellence is to embrace an organic, long-term learning process, and not to live in a shell of static, safe mediocrity. Usually, growth comes at the expense of previous comfort or safety. The hermit crab is a colorful example of a creature that lives by this aspect of the growth process (albeit without our psychological baggage). As the crab gets bigger, it needs to find a more spacious shell. So the slow, lumbering creature goes on a quest for a new home. If an appropriate new shell is not found quickly, a terribly delicate moment of truth arises. A soft creature that is used to protection of built-in armor must now go out into the world, exposed to predators in all its mushy vulnerability. That learning phase between shells is where our growth can spring from. Someone stuck with an entity theory of intelligence is like an anorexic hermit crab, starving itself so it doesn't grow to have to find a new shell. 

*Story about Josh vs Evan in Ch. 10 and Josh vs Dan in Ch. 19 highlights Investment in loss principle well*

### Related Notes
**Source**: [[The Art of Learning]]
**Tags**: #EvergreenNote

