---
title: "Loving the game"
created: 2023-06-08
---

Our early years are often marked by an uninhibited joy of discovery and learning, with setbacks viewed as opportunities for growth rather than failures. This is partly due to children's inherent fearlessness and their ability to embrace new experiences without the burden of self-doubt or fear of embarrassment. However, as we mature, this openness often gives way to a more guarded approach to learning and performance, marked by an increased awareness of risk and fear of failure. To truly excel, it is imperative to reconnect with the childlike curiosity and resilience we once possessed, where the joy of learning superseded any fear of failure. Achieving high performance and maintaining it under pressure, then, becomes an act of rediscovering the fearlessness of our youth while maintaining alignment with our unique disposition.

The life of ambition can be likened to a balance beam. As children, we traverse this beam fearlessly, experimenting with daring somersaults and flips, viewing any falls as a part of the adventure. But as adults, the beam transforms into a tightrope suspended over a fiery chasm, where every misstep seems catastrophic. The journey towards high performance, therefore, requires recapturing that childhood sense of play and courage, allowing us to perform under pressure with the same creativity and joy we had as children.

Throughout this journey, it's crucial to stay true to our unique self, especially when incorporating new information or ideas. Any new knowledge must be integrated in a way that resonates with our inner voice, serving as a steady anchor as we navigate challenges. In chess, for instance, the constant challenge is not only to dominate the game but also to maintain a healthy perspective, driven more by passion for the game than fear of failure.

The journey to high performance also demands an empathetic support system, which could be a parent, coach, or mentor. As children, these figures guide us, fostering an environment where ambition can thrive. As adults, the responsibility shifts to us. We must cultivate a healthy mindset that empowers us to confront challenges fearlessly, embrace learning with the same vigor we had as children, and navigate the path of ambition with grace and resilience.

---
### References

*Waitzkin, J. (2007). The Art of Learning: An Inner Journey to Optimal Performance. Free Press.*

> I think a life of ambition is like existing on a balance beam. As a child, there is no fear, no sense for the danger of falling. The beam feels wide and stable, and natural playfulness allows for creative leaps and fast learning. You can run around doing somersaults and flips, always testing yourself with a love for discovery and new challenges. If you happen to fall off—no problem, you just get back on. But then, as you get older, you become more aware of the risk of injury. You might crack your head or twist your knee. The beam is narrow and you have to stay up there. Plunging off would be humiliating. While a child can make the beam a playground, high-stress performers often transform the beam into a tightrope. Any slip becomes a crisis. Suddenly you have everything to lose, the rope is swaying above a crater of fire, increasingly dramatic acrobatics are expected of you but the air feels thick with projectiles aimed to dislodge your balance. What was once light and inspiring can easily mutate into a nightmare. A key component of high-level learning is cultivating a resilient awareness that is the older, conscious embodiment of a child’s playful obliviousness. My chess career ended with me teetering on a string above leaping flames, and in time, through a different medium, I rediscovered a relationship to ambition and art that has allowed me the freedom to create like a child under world championship pressure. This journey, from child back to child again, is at the very core of my understanding of success. I believe that one of the most critical factors in the transition to becoming a conscious high performer is the degree to which your relationship to your pursuit stays in harmony with your unique disposition. There will inevitably be times when we need to try new ideas, release our current knowledge to take in new information—but it is critical to integrate this new information in a manner that does not violate who we are. By taking away our natural voice, we leave ourselves without a center of gravity to balance us as we navigate the countless obstacles along our way.

> Chess was a constant challenge. My whole career, my father and I searched out opponents who were a little stronger than me, so even as I dominated the scholastic circuit, losing was part of my regular experience. I believe this was important for maintaining a healthy perspective on the game. While there was a lot of pressure on my shoulders, fear of failure didn’t move me so much as an intense passion for the game. 

> A heartfelt, empathetically present, incrementally inspiring mom or dad or coach can liberate an ambitious child to take the world by the horns. As adults, we have to take responsibility for ourselves and nurture a healthy, liberated mind-set.

> As children, we have a natural love for discovery and new challenges. Learning and ambition are playful adventures rather than dizzying experiences fraught with a sense of danger; whenever we fall, we get right back up again. But, as we mature, we begin to attach a sense of risk and fear to learning and performance and seek the comfort of old knowledge and methods. To learn and perform at increasingly higher levels, especially under stressful circumstances, we must reconnect to the experiences of our youth—to those times when our natural approach to discovery was light-hearted and being a beginner and a learner was joyful. At the core of success lies the journey from childhood back to childhood again. It is by taking this journey that we can discover how to maintain a harmonious balance between our pursuits and our own unique disposition. – https://theartoflearningproject.org/resources/art-of-introspection/love-the-game/

### Related Notes
**Source**: [[The Art of Learning]]
**Tags**: #EvergreenNote
