---
title: "Penelope's dilemma, the secretary problem, and the fallacy of 'best' in human relationships"
created: 2023-06-01
---

Penelope's dilemma, as the wife of Odysseus and the object of affection for many suitors during her husband's long absence, parallels a modern problem in decision-making theory known as the secretary problem. Posed by science writer Martin Gardner, the secretary problem asks how you can maximize your chances of choosing the best candidate from a pool, given you can only review each candidate once and cannot revisit previous options once they are passed over. For Penelope, this translates to finding the best suitor among the 108 vying for her hand.

The proposed solution suggests interviewing a fraction, roughly 37 percent (number of suitors / Euler's number in this case), of the candidates to gauge the quality available, without committing to any during this initial phase. The best candidate from this exploratory set then becomes a benchmark for evaluating the rest of the suitors. As soon as a candidate surpasses this benchmark, the advice is to choose him. This approach, which draws upon the mathematical constant Euler's number, offers a 37 percent chance of finding the best suitor.

However, the formulaic approach presents several issues, particularly when applied to real-life decisions beyond hiring or choosing a suitor. When it comes to decisions about personal relationships, careers, or other life-defining choices, the idea of the "best" option is more elusive. Human qualities and experiences can't be reduced to a single dimension for comparison, as "best" might suggest. The richness of human character and life circumstances means the selection of a life partner, for example, is more complex and personal than any algorithm could account for.

Moreover, the quest for the "best" often comes with a fear of "settling" for less than the ideal. Yet, what some interpret as "settling" might be better understood as making a decision based on available, albeit imperfect, options. This is akin to the idea of "satisficing" proposed by social scientist Herbert Simon, which suggests that with our limited knowledge and the inherent complexity of life's decisions, we should aim to find a satisfactory rather than an optimal solution.

Consequently, in life's journey, perhaps the real goal isn't to find the "best" but rather to find someone or something that provides contentment, meaning, and a sense of shared values. The key to making decisions might not lie in an algorithm but in recognizing the inherent complexities and uncertainties of life and seeking out companionship, understanding, and growth. Instead of seeking the best, perhaps we should aim for a life well lived, with someone who respects our imperfections and inspires us to become better versions of ourselves.

Related:
- [[Darwin's dilemma and the illusion of rationality in wild problem decision-making]]
- [[When faced with a decision, we should consider not just the immediate utility of our choices, but also how we may flourish]]
- [[Adam Smith's perspective on flourishing and contentment]]
- [[The Vampire Problem]]
- [[Navigating wild problems shapes personal identity and growth and surfaces the inherent limits of rational decision-making]]
- [[The journey to flourishing is paved with Type 2 experiences]]

--- 
### References

*Russel, R. (2023). Wild Problems: A Guide to Life's Decisions That Define Us. Portfolio.*

> Penelope was the wife of Odysseus, the great king and warrior of ancient Greece, whom you may also know by his Roman name, Ulysses. Odysseus goes off to the Trojan War and after twenty years, he still hasn’t come home to Ithaka. Assuming that he’s dead, a bunch of men come to Odysseus’s house in search of Penelope’s hand. A big bunch of suitors. The exact number is a little unclear, but according to one count, there are 108 of them. The suitors move into Odysseus’s house. (It’s a large house. More like a palace—there’s plenty of room for suitors.) The suitors eat, drink, and party, feasting on Odysseus’s flocks of sheep and herds of cattle, waiting for Penelope to make a decision on which of them would make the best husband. She tells the suitors that she'll pick one when she's done weaving a burial shroud for her father-in-law. Who is still alive. But at night Penelope unravels what she knits during the day. The shroud ruse works for three years, but eventually the suitors discover Penelope's trick. The suitors redouble their pressure on Penelope to make a decision and choose of them. Let's suppose that Penelope really is done with dithering and wants to find the best possible husband among the suitors. How should she decide?

> A version of Penelope's problem was posed in 1960 by columnist and science writer Martin Gardner in Scientific American in a different context–it came to be known as the secretary problem. Here is how Gardner structured it. What rule should you follow when you have a number of job applications for a position and you can interview each one and either hire or reject them? Once rejected, they move on to other options and they are unavailable for hiring. 

 > If Penelope faces these same assumptions, there is an algorithm for her to follow if she wants to maximize her chance of marrying the best man among the 108 suitors. Interview 37 percent of the suitors–in this case, that amounts to forty interviews. Penelope won't marry any of these forty. These interviews are a way to learn about the quality of what Ithaka has to offer in the way of husbands. Note the best one of the forty. Suppose the best of the first forty turns out to be Elatus. You don't marry Elatus–after all, you've turned him down so he's lost to you. But you use Elatus as a measuring stick–the bench mark–for the remaining sixty-eight. As soon as you reach someone better than Elatus, you marry him. But there's a chance that Elatus is the best candidate. Then none of the sixty-eight remaining candidates surpass him. You're then stuck with the 108th suitor, in which case Penelope doesn't get the best husband. 
 
> What's impressive is that this strategy has a surprisingly high chance of giving Penelope the best among the bunch. How high? If she follows this strategy, her odds of getting the best husband are 37 percent. Not bad. 

> To derive the formula, you take the number of suitors and divide that number by e, Euler's number. Euler's number can be represented in a number of ways, including the infinite series which adds up to roughly 2.71828 ... where the ellipsis represents an infinite number of digits after the decimal point. If you interview n/e suitors (where n is the number of suitors–in Penelope's case, 108) and pick the first one who exceeds your benchmark, your Elatus, the odds of getting the best candidate among the n suitors is 1/e, which comes to 37 percent.

> With wild problems, the quest for the best is a mistake, whether it’s the quest for the best career, the best place to go to college, the best spouse, the best anything.

>  For some problems we face, the best is fairly well defined. When Dan Gilbert's shameless hedonist is trying to get the most pleasure from making choices as a consumer–which shoes to buy, which hotel to stay in, which movie to watch tonight, which tequila to put in that poolside margarita–there are so many tools to help: recommendations from Amazon, reviews on IMDb, Tripadvisor, and Wirecutter. There's no absolute best, but usually I can get close to what's best for me when it comes to shoes, hotels, movies, tequilas, and the narrowest utilitarian areas of life. 

>  But what is the best spouse? By best, I mean not the best one in the world but the best one who is available to me and who is a willing partner. The mathematical version of Penelope’s problem assumes away the hardest part of the problem. It assumes that after interviewing forty suitors, Penelope can identify the “best” of the first forty, Elatus in my retelling. But what does that even mean? How can she possibly know who of the first forty she interviews will make the best husband?

>  Human beings are imperfect, flawed, difficult to live with, sometimes even difficult to tolerate. There is surely someone smarter than your current partner, kinder than your current partner, more physically attractive than your current partner, funnier than your current partner, more patient with your faults than your current partner—the list goes on and on. But there are very few people, maybe none, who are all of those things. How do I choose between one suitor who is sweeter than my current best romantic friend but less intelligent? Or one who shares more of my interests but with whom I have less chemistry? What are the weights I should use to trade off one attribute I care about against another? 

>  The word “best” implies a scalar—a unidimensional measurement—a number that I can use to compare two choices. That’s not the worst thing to do when it comes to hiring a job candidate, as Kahneman suggests. But choosing a life partner is a little more complicated. A life partner is the ultimate matrix of characteristics, virtues, vices, pluses, minuses. A human being. And how you experience that matrix changes over time as you ideally grow alongside your spouse. In marriage, there’s more than one goal you care about. So not only do you not know the best number of suitors to consider (though we would probably all agree that it is probably less than 108), there's no obvious way to define the best either as a benchmark or an outcome.

> You might respond by saying that it’s wrong to “settle,” to be content with someone who is merely OK rather than someone great. Actually, I’m saying something worse. I’m not encouraging you to settle; I’m telling you that you have to settle. The best spouse/partner/career/city doesn’t exist and it’s not just because they’re hard to find. It’s not a meaningful concept. This is the insight of social scientist Herbert Simon, who argued that optimization (finding the best outcome) is beyond our human limitations. What I’m calling “settling” here is closely related to what Simon called "satisficing," a combination of satisfying and sufficing, doing the best we can with our limited knowledge.

> The fear that we’re settling can paralyze us—it can be an excuse to not make any decision at all. “Settling” isn’t the right word anyway. Settling means to willingly accept an inferior option. When it comes to marriage or all kinds of wild problems, inferior is rarely on the table. We face options where some aspects of the decision appear better than others but other aspects are worse. What some people call “settling” is simply realizing that it is time to make a decision and there is no reason to think there is a better option. That's not settling. That's deciding.

> Life is a lot like trying to plan a trip to Rome without a guidebook. Even if all you care about is having a good time during your all-too-short time on this earth, you will struggle to anticipate what it is that will bring delight, pleasure, contentment. And most of us care about more than just having a good time. We would like to find purpose and meaning. We would like to do the right thing. We would like to belong. We want a life well lived. We want to flourish.

> No guidebook, not even the best one, can tell you who to travel with. If you can, marry your best friend, someone you can talk to and someone you can stay quiet with. Someone who has a good heart and shares your view of what’s important—your values and principles. Find someone you respect and who respects you. Find someone who makes your heart sing—call it love or chemistry. That’s not just good enough. It’s fantastic. It’s not a quest for the best mate but the person you can explore life with at your side, the person to share the journey with. And maybe you can find a person who respects your imperfections and at the same time helps you to aspire to be someone better than you are now. 

### Related Notes
**Source**: [[Wild Problems]]
**Tags**: #EvergreenNote
