---
title: "Stress and recovery"
created: 2023-06-07
---

The concept of "Stress and Recovery" underpins superior performance in various disciplines. This model embraces the natural rhythm of tension and relaxation, akin to the cycles found in nature. Practicing this cycle through cardiovascular interval training and mental exercises can enhance the ability to swiftly release tension and rejuvenate from mental fatigue, fostering performance resilience under pressure. Furthermore, integrating this rhythm into everyday activities—taking breaks to breathe, to rest, to play—conditions the mind and body to navigate between exertion and tranquility. As this rhythm is internalized, recovery time decreases and access to the creative power of the unconscious mind increases, bolstering intuition and authenticity. This conditioning, a practice of ebb and flow, is a crucial foundation for consistent high-level performance, enabling individuals to tap into their potential, even under stressful situations.

## Concept Breakdown

### Stress and Recovery as a Performance Strategy
Superior performance in various disciplines often hinges on the principle of "Stress and Recovery." This principle advocates for balancing periods of intense work with moments of rest and relaxation, allowing the mind and body to recover and rejuvenate. This cycle can be seen in the natural world and is critical in enhancing an individual's capacity to perform under pressure.

### The Practice of Stress and Recovery
Practicing the cycle of "Stress and Recovery" can be done through cardiovascular interval training and other mental exercises. These activities enhance our ability to swiftly release tension and recover from mental fatigue, thereby making us more resilient to stress.

### Integration of Stress and Recovery into Everyday Life
The rhythm of "Stress and Recovery" should not be confined to training periods but integrated into all aspects of life. From reading a book to working at the office, taking short breaks to rest and rejuvenate can help maintain focus and productivity. These little moments of relaxation condition our minds and bodies to alternate between periods of exertion and tranquility.

### Benefits of Mastering Stress and Recovery
Mastering the rhythm of "Stress and Recovery" offers numerous benefits. As this rhythm is internalized, the time it takes to recover from exertion decreases, while access to the unconscious mind increases. This bolsters creativity, intuition, and authenticity, ultimately enhancing overall performance.

### Stress and Recovery as a Foundation for High-Level Performance
The practice of "Stress and Recovery" serves as a critical foundation for high-level performance. As individuals become more adept at this practice, they can more readily tap into their potential, even in stressful situations, fostering consistent and reliable performance.

The concept of stress and recovery is similar to Naval's concept of working like a lion vs work like a cow (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aLhF01_nJ9Q). Cows work and graze all day long to stay full and nourished, lions rest until they see an opportunity and then they pounce. Similar to [[Charlie Munger]] & [[Warren Buffett]] waiting for possibly years before finding an opportunity for the right investment. This reinforces the idea that humans are not really meant to work 9-5, as Naval said. Leave that to the machines. 

---
### References

*Waitzkin, J. (2007). The Art of Learning: An Inner Journey to Optimal Performance. Free Press.*

> The next morning, Striegel and Loehr told me about their concept of Stress and Recovery. The physiologists at LGE had discovered that in virtually every discipline, one of the most telling features of a dominant performer is the routine use of recovery periods. Players who are able to relax in brief moments of inactivity are almost always the ones who end up coming through when the game is on the line. This is why the eminent tennis players of their day, such as Ivan Lendl and Pete Sampras, had those strangely predictable routines of serenely picking their rackets between points, whether they won or lost the last exchange, while their rivals fumed at a bad call or pumped a fist in excitement. Consider Tiger Woods, strolling to his next shot, with a relaxed focus in his eyes. Remember Michael Jordan sitting on the bench, a towel on his shoulders, letting it all go for a two-minute break before coming back in the game? Jordan was completely serene on the bench even though the Bulls desperately needed him on the court. He had the fastest recovery time of any athlete I’ve ever seen. Jim Harbaugh told me about the first time he noticed this pattern in himself. He’s a passionate guy, and liked to root on his defense when they were on the field. But after his first sessions at LGE he noticed a clear improvement in his play if he sat on the bench, relaxed, and didn’t even watch the other team’s offensive series. The more he could let things go, the sharper he was in the next drive.

> At LGE they had discovered that there is a clear physiological connection when it comes to recovery—cardiovascular interval training can have a profound effect on your ability to quickly release tension and recover from mental exhaustion. What is more, physical flushing and mental clarity are very much intertwined. There was more than one occasion that I got up from the board four or five hours into a hugely tense chess game, walked outside the playing hall, and sprinted fifty yards or up six flights of stairs. Then I'd walk back, wash my face, and be completely renewed.

> Ultimately, with incremental training very much like what I described in the chapter Making Smaller Circles, recovery time can become nearly instantaneous. And once the act of recovery is in our blood, we’ll be able to access it under the most strained of circumstances, becoming masters of creating tiny havens for renewal, even where observers could not conceive of such a break.

> In your performance training, the first step to mastering the zone is to practice the ebb and flow of stress and recovery. This should involve interval training as I have described above, at whatever level of difficulty is appropriate for the age and physical conditioning of the individual. This training could, of course, take many forms: I have already mentioned biking and resistance work, but let’s say you enjoy swimming laps in a pool. Instead of just swimming until you are exhausted and then quitting, push yourself to your healthy limit, then recover for a minute or two, and then push yourself again. Create a rhythm of intervals like the one I described with my biking. With practice, increase the intensity and duration of your sprint time, and gradually condense rest periods—you are on your way! This same pattern can be used with jogging, weight lifting, martial arts training, or playing any sport that involves cardiovascular work. If you are interested in really improving as a performer, I would suggest incorporating the rhythm of stress and recovery into all aspects of your life. Truth be told, this is what my entire approach to learning is based on—breaking down the artificial barriers between our diverse life experiences so all moments become enriched by a sense of interconnectedness. So, if you are reading a book and lose focus, put the book down, take some deep breaths, and pick it up again with a fresh eye. If you are at work and find yourself running out of mental stamina, take a break, wash your face, and come back renewed. It would be an excellent idea to spend a few minutes a day doing some simple meditation practice in which your mind gathers and releases with the ebb and flow of your breath. This will help connect your physical interval training to the mental arenas. If you enjoy the experience, gradually build up your mental stamina and spend more time at it. When practiced properly, Tai Chi Chuan, Yoga, or many forms of sitting meditation can be excellent vehicles for this work. As we get better and better at releasing tension and coming back with a full tank of gas in our everyday activities, both physical and mental, we will gain confidence in our abilities to move back and forth between concentration, adrenaline flow, physical exertion (any kind of stress), and relaxation. I can’t tell you how liberating it is to know that relaxation is just a blink away from full awareness. Besides adding to your psychological and physical resilience, this opens up some wonderful and surprising new possibilities. For one thing, now that your conscious mind is free to take little breaks, you’ll be delighted by the surges of creativity that will emerge out of your unconscious. You’ll become more attuned to your intuition and will slowly become more and more true to yourself stylistically. The unconscious mind is a powerful tool, and learning how to relax under pressure is a key first step to tapping into its potential. Interval work is a critical building block to becoming a consistent long-term performer. If you spend a few months practicing stress and recovery in your everyday life, you’ll lay the physiological foundation for becoming a resilient, dependable pressure player. The next step is to create your trigger for the zone.

> I learned this lesson in my late teens/early twenties trying to stay concentrated for 8 hours a day, two weeks at a time in world chess championships—I would burn out. When I started taking mini breaks, my endurance and quality of focus surged. Stress and recovery should be our rhythms, and physical interval training can be an excellent tool for improving mental recovery. One of many problems with multi-tasking is that the frenetic skipping leaves little room for relaxation, and thus our reservoir for energetic presence is constantly depleted.

> The natural world embodies a rhythm of action and inaction that enables plants and animals to muster the energies they require for sustenance and growth. Bears enter caves and hibernate in the winter. Plants, too, enter a dormant phase during which biological processes occur that make it possible for them to reemerge in the spring. By alternating cycles of rest with activities that push us to the outer limits of our abilities, we strengthen the bond between mind and body in a way that fuels peak ability and high-level learning and performance. Because all aspects of our lives are interconnected, the practice of stress and recovery should be incorporated into everything we take on—all experiences will be enriched as a result. Effective methods include: meditation, stretching, deep breathing, play, even washing one’s face. By conditioning ourselves to move fluidly between intervals of tension and serenity, it becomes possible to condense the duration of recovery time needed for learning and exertion; we become more able to rally our powers of intuition and creativity and call on our knowledge and skills at a moment’s notice. – https://theartoflearningproject.org/resources/peak-performance/stress-and-recovery/

### Related Notes
**Source**: [[The Art of Learning]]
**Tags**: #EvergreenNote
