---
title: "The downward spiral"
created: 2023-06-07
---

Life often presents us with obstacles and losses that can induce negative emotions. When we linger on these emotions, we divert our focus from the present to the past. This shift not only exhausts our resources but also amplifies the initial setback, creating a ripple effect of subsequent issues that veer us off our growth path. To navigate successfully through life, it is crucial to stay composed under pressure and remain rooted in the present, extracting maximum lessons from every experience.

The thin line between victory and defeat in any competitive arena is well-understood by performers across disciplines. They recognize that minor mistakes can sometimes lead to brilliant creations, with the caveat being an unhealthy obsession with perfection or exact replication. Such obsession can trigger fear and confusion, muddling decision-making. Therefore, it's essential to regain presence of mind and clarity swiftly after committing a serious error. The initial mistake is seldom disastrous; however, a succession of errors can spiral into a catastrophic chain reaction.

Visualizing two parallel lines - one representing time and the other our perception of the moment - can be illuminating. Being present aligns us with the expansion of time, while dwelling on past mistakes creates a layer of detachment as time progresses and we stagnate.

The capacity to be clear-headed, present, and composed under pressure distinguishes the best from the mediocre in all fields. The dynamics of this difference become glaringly evident in competitive situations. A player who maintains serenity and focus, as opposed to one torn apart by internal strife, has an apparent advantage, as the latter tends to make cumulative errors leading to their downfall.

In a complex process such as decision-making, cognitive biases and intuitive processes don't function in isolation. Expert thinkers integrate awareness of cognitive biases into their intuition. This fusion enhances technical understanding and enables intuitive leaps in knowledge. However, instead of intuiting the cognitive bias, we intuit the associated feelings when the bias is present. Hence, in competitive situations like a chess game, emotional attachment to past advantage following a slight mistake could lead to cognitive bias. This bias can cause the player to reject acceptable positions and overstretch for unattainable ones, triggering a downward spiral. It's crucial to stay present (see: [[The power of presence]]) to avoid emotional attachment to past evaluations and subsequent cognitive bias.

---
### References

*Waitzkin, J. (2007). The Art of Learning: An Inner Journey to Optimal Performance. Free Press.*

> When we cling to the troubling emotions that result from an obstacle or loss, we abandon the present for the past. In short order, we find ourselves using our personal resources to wage an internal war instead of using them to handle what is going on now and move forward. By focusing on a past problem it becomes easy to believe that things have taken a turn for the worse. In not being awake to the present, we magnify the original loss, allowing it to produce a ripple effect of additional problems. These, in turn, take us even further off a course of growth. We must stay cool under fire and fully in the present to glean the most we can from every experience and achieve success. – https://theartoflearningproject.org/resources/peak-performance/avoid-the-downward-spiral/

> As a competitor I’ve come to understand that the distance between winning and losing is minute, and, moreover, that there are ways to steal wins from the maw of defeat… Musicians, actors, athletes, philosophers, scientists, writers understand that brilliant creations are often born of small errors. Problems set in if the performer has a brittle dependence on the safety of absolute perfection or duplication. Then an error triggers fear, detachment, uncertainty, or confusion that muddies the decision-making process.

> One idea I taught was the importance of regaining presence and clarity of mind after making a serious error. This is a hard lesson for all competitors and performers. The first mistake rarely proves disastrous, but the downward spiral of the second, third, and fourth error creates a devastating chain reaction.

> I have always visualized two lines moving parallel to one another in space. One line is time, the other is our perception of the moment… When we are present to what is, we are right up front with the expansion of time, but when we make a mistake and get frozen in what was, a layer of detachment builds. Time goes on and we stop. 

> In every discipline, the ability to be clearheaded, present, cool under fire is much of what separates the best from the mediocre. In competition, the dynamic is often painfully transparent. If one player is serenely present while the other is being ripped apart by internal issues, the outcome is already clear. The prey is no longer objective, makes compounding mistakes, and the predator moves in for the kill. 

> Yup. And so, one of the interesting things about the academic dialogue of cognitive biases is that there is the idea that the biases have to operate completely separately from the intuitive processes. As if we have an intuitive process and then we have to go through a checklist of cognitive biases. In my experience, really high level thinkers have integrated cognitive biases – or awareness of cognitive biases – into their intuitive processes. So there's this constant process – we discussed this a couple years ago, actually – where you're deconstructing technical awareness into something that – So this process, for example, of building a pyramid of knowledge – we have a certain technical foundation, we have a high-level intuitive leap, we can then deconstruct the intuitive leap into something that we can understand technically and replicate technically. And then we're raising our foundation up higher and higher level of intuitive leaps. This is this pyramid of knowledge which, in my process, is built upon by – The intuitive leaps are what's guiding it. Similarly, we can learn how to take tactile material and integrate it into our intuitive understanding. But we aren't going to intuit the cognitive bias. We're going to intuit the feeling that corresponds with the bias being present. And so we think, – with this relative to the language, again, of Robert Pirsig – I like the language of dynamic versus static quality. If you think of a timeline in a competitive state – For example, in a chess game, there's a certain objective truth to a chess position. If you think of chess as a timeline which is moving, if you think about Pirsig's term of being at the front of the train of reality – the freight train is pushing through – dynamic qualities right at the front of that freight train. Think about that as a timeline. And then the other is the chess player's mind studying the position. When the chess player is present to the position, it's continuing. You're just running parallel to the truth of the position and the quality of the position. But if, let's say the something changes. You make a slight mistake. You move from having a slight advantage to slight disadvantage but you're emotionally still connected or attached to having the slight advantage. Then what's going to happen is that you are stopping – your dynamic quality is becoming static but the game's continuing. But what's going to happen then is that you're going to suddenly reject positions that you should accept, and you're going to stretch for positions – for valuations – that you can't really reach, and you're going to fall into a downward spiral. So that's the onset of a cognitive bias. In that case, the cognitive bias would relate to the emotional clinging of past evaluation. – The Tim Ferriss Show #148 (https://tim.blog/2016/03/23/josh-waitzkin-the-prodigy-returns/)

### Related Notes
**Source**: [[The Art of Learning]]
**Tags**: #EvergreenNote
